Document Exploratory view (#674)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/synthetic-monitoring-visualizations.asciidoc

[[synthetic-monitoring-visualizations]]
= Create synthetic monitoring visualizations

experimental[]

Based on the Uptime data you are sending to your deployment, you can create various visualizations

> relating to your monitor durations or pings over time data.

Author: No, I'll remove it.

Hover over the chart to display
crosshairs with specific metric data.

| *Pings histogram* | The Uptime pings chart is a graphical representation of the check statuses over time.

Hover over the chart to display crosshairs with specific metric data.

|===

. Let's define your report. Set the time filter as an absolute or relative time.
. Select the monitor name and/or the URL. You can make multiple selections.
. For a *monitor duration* report, you can specify the percentile to calculate and filter the chart by `average`, `median`,
`75th`, `90th`, `95th`, or `99th`.
+
NOTE: A percentile represents the value at which a certain percentage of observed values occur. For example, the 95th percentile is the
value that is greater than 95% of the observed values.

. From the *Chart type* dropdown, choose the aggregation-based visualization you want to view:

* Bar vertical
* Bar horizontal
* Bar vertical stacked
* Area
* Area stacked
* Line

. Filter the type of data you want to examine.
+
You can filter by `monitor type`, `observer location`, and any `tags` you previously created for a *monitor duration* report.
+

> You can filter by `observer location`, `monitor type`, and any `tags` you previously created for a *pings histogram* report.

Reviewer: I don't know enough about this. Does it make sense to combine these into one sentence since they're talking about **mostly** the same thing?

```
You can filter by `monitor type`, `observer location`, and any `tags` you previously created for a
*monitor duration* or *pings histogram* report.
```

Reviewer: Ahhh no, cancel this. I see why they're separate now. Maybe make the order consistent at least? One goes monitor --> observer --> tags, and the other goes observer --> monitor --> tags

Author: It's actually the order in the UI. However, for docs purposes I'll keep them consistent :-)

Reviewer: Ohhhhh, I see. That's funky 😄

. To further segment the data and view multiple data series on the chart, you can specify a *breakdown*.
+
For a *monitor duration* report, you can segment data by `location`, `ID`, or `port`.
+
For a *pings histogram* report, you can segment data by `observer location` or `monitor type`.

> To customise the visualisation further, click *Open in Lens* where you can

Reviewer: I'd change these to American English, especially since you use the AE "visualization" in the next sentence

```suggestion
To customize the visualization further, click *Open in Lens* where you can
```

Author: Ah, I'm a creature of habit :-)

Reviewer: :)

modify visualizations with the drag and drop editor. To learn more, see our {kibana-ref}/lens.html[Lens]

> documentation.

Author: Thanks, good to know.

[[synthetic-monitoring-visualizations]]
= Create synthetic monitoring visualizations

experimental[]

> Based on the Uptime data you are sending to {ess}, you can create various visualizations

Author: Thanks. I replaced it with 'your deployment'.

relating to your monitor durations or pings over time data.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/synthetic-monitoring-visualization.png[Synthetic monitoring visualization]

. Go to *Observability > Uptime*.
. On the *Overview* page, click *Analyze data*.
. For data type, select *Synthetic Monitoring*.
. Under **Report**, choose the type of data you want to analyze:
+
|=== 

| *Monitor duration* | The Uptime monitor duration time-series chart displays the timing for each check that {heartbeat} performed.

The visualization helps you to gain insights into how quickly requests resolve by the targeted endpoint
and give you a sense of how frequently a host or endpoint was down in your selected timespan.

Hover over the chart to display
crosshairs with specific metric data.

| *Pings histogram* | The Uptime pings chart is a graphical representation of the check statuses over time.

Hover over the chart to display crosshairs with specific metric data.

|===

. Let's define your report. Set the time filter as an absolute or relative time.

> . Select the monitor name and the URL. You can make multiple selections.

Author: Great. Thanks.

. For a *monitor duration* report, you can specify the percentile to calculate and filter the chart by `average`, `median`,
`75th`, `90th`, `95th`, or `99th`.
+
NOTE: A percentile represents the value at which a certain percentage of observed values occur. For example, the 95th percentile is the
value that is greater than 95% of the observed values.

. From the *Chart type* dropdown, choose the aggregation-based visualization you want to view:

* Bar vertical
* Bar horizontal
* Bar vertical stacked
* Area
* Area stacked
* Line

. Filter the type of data you want to examine.
+
You can filter by `monitor type`, `observer location`, and any `tags` you previously created for a *monitor duration* report.
+

> You can filter by `observer location`, `monitor type`, and any `tags` you previously created for a *pings* report.

Author: Thanks.
